Much reporting on opposition to the Obama administration portrays it as a sort of populist uprising. Yet the antics of the socialism-and-death-panels crowd are only part of the story of anti-Obamaism, and arguably the less important part. If you really want to know what’s going on, watch the corporations.

How can you do that? Follow the money — donations by corporate political action committees.

Look, for example, at the campaign contributions of commercial banks — traditionally Republican-leaning, but only mildly so. So far this year, according to The Washington Post, 63 percent of spending by banks’ corporate PACs has gone to Republicans, up from 53 percent last year. Securities and investment firms, traditionally Democratic-leaning, are now giving more money to Republicans. And oil and gas companies, always Republican-leaning, have gone all out, bestowing 76 percent of their largess on the G.O.P.

These are extraordinary numbers given the normal tendency of corporate money to flow to the party in power. Corporate America, however, really, truly hates the current administration. Wall Street, for example, is in “a state of bitter, seething, hysterical fury” toward the president, writes John Heilemann of New York magazine. What’s going on?

One answer is taxes — not so much on corporations themselves as on the people who run them. The Obama administration plans to raise tax rates on upper brackets back to Clinton-era levels. Furthermore, health reform will in part be paid for with surtaxes on high-income individuals. All this will amount to a significant financial hit to C.E.O.’s, investment bankers and other masters of the universe.

Now, don’t cry for these people: they’ll still be doing extremely well, and by and large they’ll be paying little more as a percentage of their income than they did in the 1990s. Yet the fact that the tax increases they’re facing are reasonable doesn’t stop them from being very, very angry.

Nor are taxes the whole story.

Many Obama supporters have been disappointed by what they see as the administration’s mildness on regulatory issues — its embrace of limited financial reform that doesn’t break up the biggest banks, its support for offshore drilling, and so on. Yet corporate interests are balking at even modest changes from the permissiveness of the Bush era.

From the outside, this rage against regulation seems bizarre. I mean, what did they expect? The financial industry, in particular, ran wild under deregulation, eventually bringing on a crisis that has left 15 million Americans unemployed, and required large-scale taxpayer-financed bailouts to avoid an even worse outcome. Did Wall Street expect to emerge from all that without facing some new restrictions? Apparently it did.

So what President Obama and his party now face isn’t just, or even mainly, an opposition grounded in right-wing populism. For grass-roots anger is being channeled and exploited by corporate interests, which will be the big winners if the G.O.P. does well in November.

If this sounds familiar, it should: it’s the same formula the right has been using for a generation. Use identity politics to whip up the base; then, when the election is over, give priority to the concerns of your corporate donors. Run as the candidate of “real Americans,” not those soft-on-terror East coast liberals; then, once you’ve won, declare that you have a mandate to privatize Social Security. It comes as no surprise to learn that American Crossroads, a new organization whose goal is to deploy large amounts of corporate cash on behalf of Republican candidates, is the brainchild of none other than Karl Rove.

But won’t the grass-roots rebel at being used? Don’t count on it. Last week Rand Paul, the Tea Party darling who is now the Republican nominee for senator from Kentucky, declared that the president’s criticism of BP over the disastrous oil spill in the gulf is “un-American,” that “sometimes accidents happen.” The mood on the right may be populist, but it’s a kind of populism that’s remarkably sympathetic to big corporations.

So where does that leave the president and his party? Mr. Obama wanted to transcend partisanship. Instead, however, he finds himself very much in the position Franklin Roosevelt described in a famous 1936 speech, struggling with “the old enemies of peace — business and financial monopoly, speculation, reckless banking, class antagonism, sectionalism, war profiteering.”

And that’s not necessarily a bad thing. Roosevelt turned corporate opposition into a badge of honor: “I welcome their hatred,” he declared. It’s time for President Obama to find his inner F.D.R., and do the same. 

No ideology survives the collision with real-world politics perfectly intact. General principles have to bend to accommodate the complexities of history, and justice is sometimes better served by compromise than by zealous intellectual consistency.
Susan Etheridge for The New York Times

This was all that Rand Paul needed to admit, after his victory in Kentucky’s Republican Senate primary, when NPR and Rachel Maddow asked about his views of the 1964 Civil Rights Act. “As a principled critic of federal power,” he could have said, “I oppose efforts to impose Washington’s will on states and private institutions. As a student of the history of segregation and slavery, however, I would have made an exception for the Civil Rights Act.”

But Paul just couldn’t help himself. He had to play Hamlet, to hem and haw about the distinction between public and private discrimination, to insist on his sympathy for the civil rights movement while conspicuously avoiding saying that he would have voted for the bill that outlawed segregation.

By the weekend (and under duress), he finally said it. But the tap-dancing route he took to get there was offensive, tone deaf and politically crazy.

It was also sadly typical of the political persuasion that Rand Paul represents.

This persuasion shouldn’t be confused with the Tea Party movement, whose inchoate antideficit enthusiasms Paul rode to victory last Tuesday. Nor is it just libertarianism in general, a label that gets slapped on everyone from Idaho milita members to Silicon Valley utopians to pro-choice Republicans in Greenwich.

Paul is a libertarian, certainly, but more importantly he’s a particular kind of a libertarian. He’s culturally conservative (opposing both abortion and illegal immigration), radically noninterventionist (he’s against the Iraq war and the United Nations), and so stringently constitutionalist that he views nearly everything today’s federal government does as a violation of the founding fathers’ vision.

This worldview goes by many names, including “paleoconservatism,” “the old right” and “paleolibertarianism.” But its adherents — Paul and his father, Ron, included — view themselves as America’s only true conservatives, arguing that the modern conservative movement has sold out to both big government and the military-industrial complex.

Instead of celebrating the usual Republican pantheon, paleoconservatives identify with the “beautiful losers” of American history, to borrow a phrase from the paleocon journalist Sam Francis — the anti-imperialists who opposed the Spanish-American War, the libertarians who stood athwart the New Deal yelling “stop,” the Midwestern Republicans who objected to the growth of the national security state after World War II. And they offer an ideological synthesis that’s well outside either political party’s mainstream — antiwar and antiabortion, against the Patriot Act but in favor of a border fence, and skeptical of the drug war and the welfare state alike.

In an age of lockstep partisanship, there’s a lot to admire about this unusual constellation of ideas, and its sweeping critique of American politics as usual. There’s a reason that both Rand and Ron Paul have inspired so much visceral enthusiasm, especially among younger voters, while attracting an eclectic cross-section of supporters — hipsters and N.R.A. members, civil libertarians and Christian conservatives, and stranger bedfellows still.

The problem is that paleoconservatives are self-marginalizing, and self-destructive.

Like many groups that find themselves in intellectually uncharted territory, they have trouble distinguishing between ideas that deserve a wider hearing and ideas that are crankish or worse. (Hence Ron Paul’s obsession with the gold standard and his son’s weakness for conspiracy theories.)

Like many outside-the-box thinkers, they’re good at applying their principles more consistently than your average partisan, but lousy at knowing when to stop. (Hence the tendency to see civil rights legislation as just another unjustified expansion of federal power.)

And like many self-conscious iconoclasts, they tend to drift in ever-more extreme directions, reveling in political incorrectness even as they leave common sense and common decency behind.

It isn’t surprising that two of the most interesting “paleo” writers of the last few decades, Francis and Joseph Sobran, ended their careers way out on the racist or anti-Semitic fringe. It isn’t a coincidence that the most successful “paleo” presidential candidate, Pat Buchanan, opposes not only America’s interventions in Iraq, but the West’s involvement in World War II as well. It isn’t surprising that Ron Paul kept company in the 1990s with acolytes who attached his name to bigoted pamphleteering.

And it shouldn’t come as a shock that his son found himself publicly undone, in what should have been his moment of triumph, because he was too proud to acknowledge the limits of ideology, and to admit that a principle can be pushed too far. 

If the Obama administration wants to demonstrate that it is practical and just to try some terrorism suspects in military tribunals instead of federal courts, it is off to a very poor start.

Justice Department and Pentagon officials have chosen a troubling case for the first trial under the revisions that were adopted to the Military Commissions Act in 2009 — a Toronto-born Guantánamo Bay detainee named Omar Khadr. Mr. Khadr, 23, has been in detention since he was 15, when he allegedly threw a hand grenade during a firefight in Afghanistan that fatally wounded Sgt. First Class Christopher Speer.

Mr. Khadr was not a mere bystander. He was indoctrinated into armed conflict by his father, a member of Osama bin Laden’s circle who was killed by Pakistani forces in 2003. But if his trial goes forward this summer as scheduled, he will be the first person in decades to be tried by a Western nation for war crimes allegedly committed as a child.

That has drawn justified criticism from United Nations officials and civil liberties and human rights groups. The conditions of Mr. Khadr’s imprisonment have been in clear violation of the Geneva Conventions and international accords on the treatment of children.

During a recent pretrial hearing at Guantánamo, it emerged that his initial questioning at Afghanistan’s Bagram prison occurred while he was sedated for pain and shackled to a stretcher following his hospitalization for severe wounds suffered in the fighting.

His first interrogator, identified at the hearing only as Interrogator One, was an Army sergeant later convicted of detainee abuse in another case. He used threats of rape and death to frighten the teenaged Omar Khadr into talking. Another witness recalled seeing him hooded and handcuffed to his cell with his arms held painfully above his shoulders. When the hood was removed, he testified, he could see that the teenager was crying.

In January, the Supreme Court of Canada condemned the questioning of Mr. Khadr by a Canadian official who then shared the results with American prosecutors. The ruling cited Mr. Khadr’s lack of access to counsel and his inclusion in the military’s notorious “frequent flier” program, which used sleep deprivation to elicit statements about serious criminal charges.

A ruling from the military judge on the admissibility of Mr. Khadr’s statements is not expected for several weeks. But there’s already a bad lingering taste from the hearing, which began just hours after Defense Secretary Robert Gates formally approved a new set of rules for the tribunals and before Mr. Khadr’s lawyers or the judge had a chance to review them. The rules are an improvement over those that governed the Bush commissions, but they have flaws, including the use of hearsay.

During the hearing, the Pentagon barred four reporters from covering any military commission because they printed the name of Interrogator One, even though it has been public for years and is readily available on the Internet. The administration needs to restore the reporters’ credentials.

It also needs to press forward with negotiations on a plea deal. The evidence that Mr. Khadr threw the deadly hand grenade is not clear-cut. Even if it were, it would be impossible to overlook his abuse in custody, and status as a juvenile, which deprived him of mature judgment.

After Mr. Khadr’s eight-year ordeal, it would be no disrespect to Sergeant Speer to return Mr. Khadr to his home country under terms designed to protect public safety and strive for his rehabilitation. 

Few Americans know what a “medical loss ratio” is, but a fierce struggle over how to calculate it under the new health care reform law will determine how much insurers must spend on patient care and how much they can retain for administration and profits. This is but one of many battles that will emerge as federal and state regulators develop regulations to implement reform.


The new law requires health insurers, starting in 2011, to spend at least 80 to 85 percent of the premiums they collect on medical services or activities that improve the quality of care. (That percentage is the medical loss ratio.) The remainder can be allocated to profits or administrative activities that do not directly benefit patients, such as marketing, overhead and salaries.

The law leaves plenty of room for finagling over what can be counted as a quality improvement activity. The National Association of Insurance Commissioners, which is helping the administration develop standards, is being lobbied by insurers to adopt a broad definition and by consumer advocates to keep it narrow.

Some insurers are clearly overreaching. They argue that much of the cost of setting up networks of providers should count as quality improvement, because they check the credentials and disciplinary records of doctors. They want to include programs to root out fraud or overbilling because they probably weed out some bad doctors as well. And they would include the cost of programs, including precertification, that judge whether care is covered and appropriate. All these look like activities whose primary purpose is to reduce costs for the insurer with quality at best a secondary issue.

Senator Jay Rockefeller, chairman of the commerce committee, says his staff has found that insurers are already reclassifying many administrative costs as medical expenses to create the appearance of a higher medical loss ratio. He is rightly urging a rigorous standard.

Sensible boundaries can surely be drawn. Health information technology that improves patient care by preventing drug interactions should clearly count, but technology that primarily streamlines business operations should not. Programs that help manage and coordinate the care given chronically ill patients should count, but programs that review whether doctor-recommended services are covered should not.

Regulators will have to find an approach that prevents insurers from gaming the system while encouraging them to spend money on meaningful measures to improve quality — a major goal of the reform law. 
The effort to combat global warming has flagged as other crises have commanded the attention of politicians and the public. New reports from the National Academy of Sciences offer persuasive evidence that it would be folly to put off dealing with the problem any longer.

We hope the reports will jolt the United States Senate into moving forward on an energy and climate bill. They provide an authoritative rebuttal to skeptics in the Senate and industry who have pounced upon small errors in the 2007 report from the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change to suggest that the whole thing is a hoax.

The academy’s conclusion is clear: “Climate change is occurring, is caused largely by human activities, and poses significant risks for a broad range of human and natural systems.” The reports acknowledge that while the magnitude of these risks — sea level rise, drought, disease, the destruction of marine- and land-based ecosystems — are difficult to predict, society would be wise to move swiftly and aggressively to minimize them.

The academy says that between 2012 and 2050 the nation should produce no more than a total of 200 billion tons of greenhouse gases, ideally considerably less. (At the current rate of seven billion tons a year, the country would produce 266 billion tons.) The longer we wait to begin reducing emissions, the academy adds, the harder and more costly it will be to reach the target. It recommends putting a price on emissions as well as investments in energy efficiency, alternative fuels and developing cleaner technologies.

A bill that would give this country a decent shot at achieving these goals passed the House last year. A companion bill, recently introduced in the Senate, is going nowhere. Indeed, the Senate continues to flirt with a retrograde proposal introduced by Lisa Murkowski of Alaska that would undermine the Environmental Protection Agency’s authority to regulate greenhouse gases.

That authority will become even more important if Congress fails to act. That the Senate would even think of undercutting it is astonishing. 

Democrats in New York go to their state convention this week with plans to crown Attorney General Andrew Cuomo as their candidate for governor. But behind this harmonious spectacle looms a political dogfight about who should replace Mr. Cuomo as attorney general. There are at least five Democratic candidates in the running, and Mr. Cuomo and the party’s delegates should make sure that all of these qualified contenders get places on the primary ballot in September.

In politically competitive seasons like this one, it is not unusual for party leaders to try to avoid primaries. They prefer to designate one candidate per office and cut back on the infighting. What works for the parties, however, doesn’t work for the voters. New Yorkers deserve more choices on Election Day, not fewer.

Candidates get on the party primary ballot by winning 25 percent of the convention delegates’ votes. That balloting is scheduled to take place at Wednesday’s session in suburban Rye Brook. In the past, thoughtful party leaders have held several ballots with different candidates on each in order to let more contestants into the primary. They should do that again this year.

If candidates are not given a line on the ballot through the party, they must collect signatures from Democratic voters around the state — a process that is costly and time-consuming and a way of excluding candidates who can’t afford $200,000 or more in staff work and legal fees.

The Democratic contenders for attorney general include the Nassau County district attorney, Kathleen Rice; State Senator Eric Schneiderman; Assemblyman Richard Brodsky; a former state insurance superintendent, Eric Dinallo; and Sean Coffey, a trial lawyer who plans to put about $2 million into the race. If there are other serious candidates, Democrats should add them all to their list.

State Republicans, who meet in Manhattan in June, have the same chance to give their members more choices for governor. Now, there are three major candidates: Rick Lazio, a former Long Island congressman; Steve Levy, the Suffolk County executive who announced in March that he would become a Republican; and Carl Paladino, a Buffalo-area businessman.

Note to party bosses: Give party voters a choice. 

I KILLED someone. It happened in 1994. And every three years after that — I killed again and again, whether I felt like it or not. I was paid, not well, but it was something. And, as those things go, I rather enjoyed it. I wasn’t moonlighting as an assassin, though, but as an actress on NBC’s “Law & Order.”

For two decades the show has been a staple gig for New York actors, a reliable way to make money between stage roles — which is why tonight, when what is likely to be the final episode is broadcast, New Yorkers might hear a collective wail emanating from the theater district. What will we do without “Law & Order”?

When the show first appeared in 1990, actors in the city rejoiced. Before then, cost and concerns for film crews’ safety usually meant that “New York” was played by Vancouver or Toronto. “Law & Order’s” producers took a risk and immediately started casting local actors for the sort of one-off jobs that we rely on to subsidize our theater habit.

“Law & Order” quickly became a part of our lives, another loop in an already tightly knit community. In the early days we would gather religiously to see our friends as killers, punks and occasional dead bodies. We claimed the show as our own; not only did it give us stage actors a temporary job, but it also employed old theater pros, like Jerry Orbach and Sam Waterston, in leading roles.

Over the years, though, as the empire expanded with spinoffs that created even more work for us all, we started taking it for granted. “Law & Order” credits were as ubiquitous in theater programs as thanking one’s parents. It became not a question of having been on the show, but which one, and how often. Those who hadn’t booked it yet would sometimes use the show as a career barometer. “I can’t even get on ‘Law & Order’!” they would lament.

We shared strategies for getting cast and theories about why this or that person got left behind. Blond actor friends would scoff: “Don’t even audition if you have blue eyes. God knows, no one in New York has blue eyes!” Black actor friends would joke that to be considered for a part they would have to show up to the audition in a hoodie, stuff their hands in their pockets and mumble their lines.

These complaints, of course, were not always true or fair: approximately 700 speaking roles, played by actors from all walks of New York life, were doled out yearly by what we eventually called “the mother ship.”

The show also helped me discover actors I didn’t know — Ann Dowd, Denis O’Hare, Sharon Washington and Betsy Aidem, to name a few — prompting me to seek them out on stage.

Recently, I caught a “Law & Order” rerun. It was the very end of the episode and Sam Waterston’s character was talking to one of the revolving-door assistant D.A.’s. She asks a question. He gets the last quip. Same-old, same-old.

But then, he turns and walks away into one of the most beautiful New York snowfalls I’ve ever seen. At that moment I fell in love with the city all over again, and with the show, too. It reminded me that for New York theater actors, “Law & Order” did more than just pay for dinner. It was a part of our family. 

We know the official results of Tuesday’s primaries: Rand Paul won; Arlen Specter lost; and Blanche Lincoln survived, if only to put off the inevitable. The lessons one can draw from this are as clear as the waters off southeastern Louisiana: the Democrats are doomed; the Republicans are doomed; incumbents are doomed; the Tea Parties are omnipotent; the Tea Parties are impotent; it’s all about Big Government; it’s all about Big Money; all politics is still local; all politics is still local to the 202 area code; it’s all about Rush Limbaugh; it’s all about Nancy Pelosi; it’s all about Ron Paul; it’s all about the Constitution …

Or, let’s say, it’s all about Barack Obama. Let’s count the ways:

“Obama ignored the Tea Party movement,” writes Jennifer Rubin at Commentary. “He ignored polls on health-care reform. He ignored the election results in New Jersey, Virginia, and Massachusetts. And last night’s elections confirmed that now anyone associated with Washington insiderism and big-government spending is imperiled.”

    Did Arlen Specter’s loss and Rand Paul’s win reflect unhappiness with the president? 

Here is Rubin’s itemized list: “Arlen Specter proved that expediency and convictionless politics — as well as clinging to Obama — aren’t going to cut it with voters”; “Blanche Lincoln barely edged out Lt. Gov. Bill Halter … and her stalwart defense of ObamaCare didn’t help her a bit. It seems that even for Democrats, ObamaCare is nothing to crow about”; “and in the Pennsylvania 12th, the Democrats held John Murtha’s seat with a skilled candidate who ran a well-polished campaign … there can be no better sign of Obama’s toxic impact on his party than the fact that Democrat Mark Critz survived by running against ObamaCare. And he was smart enough to keep Obama out of the district and bring Bill Clinton in to campaign with him.”

The Washington Post’s Karen Tumulty and Shailagh Murray disagree that the president was “kept out” of the Pennsylvania House race: “While Obama did not campaign in the special election to replace the late congressman John P. Murtha (D-Pa.), he did play a major role — as the Republicans’ favorite foil in a conservative Pennsylvania district where he is deeply unpopular. But by tailoring his message to local concerns, Democrat Mark Critz won handily against a GOP candidate who framed the vote as an opportunity to register a protest against Obama and House Speaker Nancy Pelosi (D-Calif.).”

C. Edmund Wright of the American Thinker also disagrees with Rubin — but only on the former president, not the current one: “There is no clearer symbol of the trouble Obama is in than Blanche Lincoln,” he writes. “She is a sitting U.S. senator and has the strong endorsement of the two most popular Democrats in a century — Obama and Bill Clinton — and she is barely hanging on in her struggle to win a primary … For an incumbent to be rejected by 60 percent of her party’s voters is startling. This is a net loss for Obama and for the Clintons as well, not to mention an entire party that would readily admit that those are the biggest names in their arsenal.”

“President Obama endorsed Specter and Pennsylvania said, So what?” adds punker-turned-pundit Henry Rollins at Vanity Fair. “I love that. America’s talking. The president would be well served to listen.”

“The GOP would be better off if Mr. Specter had won,” insists Karl Rove, writing at The Wall Street Journal. “The weaknesses that became apparent in the primary would have doomed him in the fall.” Still, he too sees Obama as the coming up short:

    If Mr. Obama’s vaunted political operations couldn’t deliver for Mr. Specter and Mrs. Lincoln, what does it say about the fall? Democrats are increasingly likely to distance themselves from Mr. Obama, either ignoring him or running against him. Which brings us to Pennsylvania’s 12th District. Democrats are right to crow about keeping that seat, left vacant by the death of Jack Murtha. Murtha’s longtime aide, Mark Critz, won with a message that he was pro-life, pro-gun and anti-ObamaCare, while benefiting from a sympathy vote for Murtha’s legacy.

More than a few Democrats are taking issue with the conventional wisdom on Specter, however, on the grounds that Obama was only sorta, kinda supported the former Republican. As Newsweek’s Ben Adler reported in the midst of Tuesday’s voting: “The political press is abuzz over the fact that President Obama and Vice President Joe Biden (who was born in Scranton, Pa.) are not stopping in Pennsylvania to campaign for Sen. Arlen Specter in the waning hours of his effort to defend his seat from Rep. Joe Sestak in Tuesday’s Democratic primary … Typically, a presidential administration tries not to campaign too hard for a primary candidate who is destined to lose, because they don’t want to weaken or alienate the party’s eventual nominee.”

Jonathan Chait of The New Republic wonders how anyone could anyone could assume that “Pennsylvania Democrats’ choice to nominate Joe Sestak over a man they’ve been voting against for forty years was a repudiation of President Obama.”

“The Obama administration threw Specter under the bus,” Pat Caddell, who was Jimmy Carter’s pollster, said in an interview with Newsmax. “I don’t believe it was a defeat for Obama at all. Specter did this to himself by playing around with the stimulus bill early on. If he hadn’t, [Republican candidate Pat] Toomey would have run for governor, which is what he was going to do instead of the Senate if Specter hadn’t switched parties. The administration got what it wanted out of Specter, got him to vote they way he did. They think Sestak is a stronger candidate.” (The video is something of a hoot, particularly the part where Caddell calls the Obama health care reform a “crime against democracy.”)

Margaret Carlson, writing at The Daily Beast, feels that Obama only indirectly did Specter in: “Then came Obama’s nomination of Elena Kagan to the Supreme Court, which reminded people of that long-ago performance by Specter as he slammed Anita Hill during the Clarence Thomas hearings. Not too long ago, before Specter pledged Democrats his troth, Specter voted against the White House nomination of Kagan for solicitor general. Not surprisingly, he had a hard time finding takers for his reasons why she wasn’t qualified for that job—but should be confirmed to serve on the Supreme Court.”

Seems like a stretch, but Jennifer Rubin thinks Carlson was onto something: “In this we saw vintage Obama as well as classic Specter. Obama didn’t have a care in the world that his Kagan selection (which has gone over like a lead balloon with his base) would highlight Specter’s lack of core convictions. And Specter was at his typical squishiness in trying to disguise his true motives in these confirmation battles: ensuring his own re-election.”

Sometimes bloggers get kudos for being correct, other times for being original. I’m wondering if Jonathan Bernstein of A Plain Blog About Politics is going to be both. “Here’s the thing: there’s nothing ‘increasingly local’ at all about Rand Paul or Joe Sestak,” he writes. “I really don’t want to read much into a couple of results, but if they symbolize anything, it’s national influence on state and local elections. Paul is all about national Republicans — Palin and DeMint and his father — reaching in and influencing a state primary.”

So, are we seeing the comeback of the party machine, even if it’s been re-engineered as a stealth bomber? Here’s Bernstein:

    There is something different about contemporary parties than older parties, which is that national element … In the nineteenth century and into the twentieth, local parties were able to control their nominations. Over the course of the twentieth century, and probably bottoming out sometime in the 1960s or 1970s, those parties lost control of nominations to candidates, who formed their own personal organizations…at the extremes, parties were relatively empty labels that independent candidates battled over. Over the last thirty or forty years, however, parties have evolved, developing strong national components that never existed in previous strong-party eras, and once again parties generally control their nominations. I certainly don’t see anything in any of the cases this year (not just Sestak and Paul, but also Rubio, and the NY-23 special, and others) that seem to be about parties losing control over their own nominations, as opposed to party groups battling over those nominations.

    Of course, no matter how strong parties get, as long as they are permeable and not strictly hierarchical they will still feature internal clashes, which will often play out in nomination fights. To the extent that independent candidates are also strong, they will sometimes clash with party choices. Really, I think that’s the best way of looking at Arlen Specter. He obviously wasn’t a creature of the Democratic Party establishment; he was, in many ways, a great example of the strong, independent candidates of an earlier era in American politics. The political system can still produce such creatures, but we’re in a more partisan era now, and if it symbolizes anything, the demise of Arlen Specter is probably best seen as a sign of the strength of the new parties. 

Well, if Bernstein’s right, at least the parties are fighting it out in public now rather than in smoke-filled rooms. Perhaps we’ll be able to test the thesis on June 8, when we’ll get the results of three major Republican primaries: Nevada’s senate race and California’s senate and gubernatorial contests. 
