T. S. Eliot wrote about when memory mixes with desire. Politicians get in trouble when desire nixes memory.

They know they are misrepresenting an experience, but can’t help themselves. Their desire to be the person they describe is too overpowering.

Politicians are actors trapped in the same part, and some occasionally feel the need to punch up the script. They are salesmen engaged in the hard sell, and some occasionally get carried away.

Consider Richard Blumenthal. The 64-year-old attorney general of Connecticut, who is running for Chris Dodd’s seat in the Senate, had a fine résumé that needed no sprucing up. He has degrees from Harvard and Yale Law School, clerked for Justice Harry Blackmun on the Supreme Court, and spent six years in the Marine Corps Reserve.

But like other politicians, Blumenthal added a filigree here and there, not because he needed them to win, but perhaps because those more heroic actions fed his innermost desires.

He copped last week to “a few misplaced words” that indicated he served in Vietnam when in fact he received five deferments before joining the Marine Reserve stateside — only after pulling a low draft number. (He had desk jockey duty and organized a Toys for Tots drive.)

These cases, however, are never merely about words. They’re more profoundly about identity.

“I think that lies are like wishes,” said Bella DePaulo, a psychology professor at the University of California at Santa Barbara. “So when you wish you were a certain kind of person that you know you’re not, and maybe you’re not willing to do what it would take to become that person or can’t go back, then it becomes very tempting to lie.”

Whether out of some residual guilt about avoiding Vietnam or not, Blumenthal became a fierce advocate for veterans’ rights. He slipped from merely saying “I served during the Vietnam era” to saying “In Vietnam, we had to endure taunts and insults, and no one said, ‘Welcome home.’ I say, ‘Welcome home.’ ” He failed to correct many news reports that printed his spurts of hyperbole.

It may have had something to do with what David Halberstam called the “patriotism fault line running through this country.” Writing in Vanity Fair in 2004 about the right’s scurrilous smear on John Kerry’s bravery in Vietnam, Halberstam said, “We require Democrats to work a little harder to prove that they’re really patriotic and not somehow in league with our enemies.”

Dan Quayle supported the Vietnam War that he avoided when his family pulled strings to get him into the Indiana National Guard. Yet he called himself a “Vietnam-era veteran” in campaign literature when he ran for the Senate in 1980.

Pete Dawkins, the Republican former Heisman Trophy winner at West Point, lost a Senate race in New Jersey in 1988 after being ensnared in a web of overstatement. The worst was a fund-raising letter to West Point graduates in which Dawkins, a decorated retired Army brigadier general, falsely claimed that he had been wounded in Vietnam and served two tours there instead of one.

The Wall Street Journal editorial page compared Blumenthal’s stretching on Vietnam to Eliot Spitzer’s stretching out with call girls, and called his character flawed. But chronic puffer-uppers can have impressive public service careers.

When Joe Biden aped the British politician Neil Kinnock to boost his own presidential chances in 1988, he clearly overidentified with Kinnock’s life: two scrappy, working-class Celtic kids with a talent for gab who rose without privilege in coal-mining territory. Sometimes Biden credited Kinnock and once he didn’t, speaking at a debate in the first person, which created a problem when facts from Kinnock’s life and Biden’s diverged.

But Biden is obviously a decent guy. He went on to become a truth-teller on Iraq, succeeding the vice president who was anything but.

Al Gore was criticized during the 2000 campaign for a tendency to heighten the truth, but it was innocent compared with the vile exaggeration that W. and Cheney employed to trick the country into going along with an invasion of Iraq.

In 2008, Hillary Clinton got caught burnishing her résumé twice. She worried that her time as first lady was not substantive enough, so she built up some foreign trips to sound more presidential.

She had to concede she “misspoke” after saying she had run head down to evade sniper fire after landing in Bosnia in 1996, when actually she was met by a little girl who read a poem. Hillary also hyped her role in the Irish peace process.

But like the veterans who surrounded Blumenthal shouting “Ooh-Rah!” at a news conference, the Irish were so grateful to Hillary for her support that they did not mind the blarney. She’s gone on to become a respected secretary of state.

With political kleptomania, DePaulo notes, “your lies often reveal who you wish you were.” 
